# ComalSpringflow

## Open Source Machine Learning Springflow Prediction Model
Open source is defined by the Open Source Initiative as a software or program that has (1) free distribution, (2) source code, (3) derived works, (4) integrity of the author's source code, (5) no discrimination against persons or groups, (6) no discrimination against fields of endeavor, (7) distribution of license, (8) license must not be specified to a project, (9) license must not restrict other software, and (10) license must be technology-neutral. The benefits of open source include fast bug fixes in the source code, a large online community, and broad adoption of the software or programming packages.  The open source community has created reputable machine learning technologies, especially in Python.  These include keras, scikit-learn, TensorFlow, and Theano. The Python library, scikit-learn, was used in this study as it contains prepackaged tools for data normalization and standardization, statistical analysis, machine learning model runs, and model output post-processing.  All Python code written for this study is included in this online repository.  Every workflow in this study, from accessing data subsequent preprocessing to machine learning model runs, is completely reproducible and open source for other researchers to learn from and incorporate into their studies as desired. 

## Problem Statement
The Edwards Aquifer Authority (EAA) and all stakeholders need accurate and current springflow data in order to make informed decisions for Comal Springs, especially during drought periods when the endangered species that inhabit the springs are most at risk due to low water levels.  However, springflow is difficult to measure directly due to the complexity of numerous seeps and spring orifices and the intermittent presence of rainfall and runoff.  The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) is the federal agency responsible for correctly measuring the daily spring discharge and the EAA is responsible for regulating discharge through groundwater pumping or withdrawal to ensure the springs are flowing above drought thresholds.  

The current method used by the USGS for measuring springflow at Comal Springs involves separating the springflow component from the streamflow, otherwise referred to as baseflow separation or hydrograph separation.  This method includes some manual estimation of springflow, making this method's results often subjective and time-consuming.  The USGS often needs up to three months to publicly release springflow estimates, though the EAA and other water resource managers need to make daily water use decisions, especially when the aquifer levels are close to drought stage thresholds.  Additionally, these springs are primarily modeled by the EAA using theory-based models to simulate pumping scenarios and drought scenarios.  Here, a springflow prediction model was created using a theory-guided data science approach as a viable option for water resource management. 

